The Utility Monster and What It Shows Us About the Validity of Utilitarianism
Word Count: 857

In this paper, I will show that the example of the utility monster is the strongest objection of utilitarianism that we have discussed in class and that the utilitarian’s best reply does not make a convincing argument.
I will begin by first explaining the definition of utilitarianism according to William Shaw in a chapter of his work, “Consequentialism.” Shaw states that utilitarianism is a type of consequentialist theory which says that only the well-being of humans or other sentient beings is valuable in and of itself, and this well-being is something that can be added or subtracted in order to find overall well-being. Consequentialism is the general theory that an act is right if and only if it maximizes the expected impartial value. In addition to this, according to utilitarianism, each individual’s well-being carries the same weight as another individual’s. Following this, utilitarians believe that the right course of action is always the one which maximizes overall utility (happiness or well-being) (Shaw 30-31).
Now, I will explain what I believe to be the strongest objection to this theory, which is the example of the utility monster. According to Robert Nozick, “utilitarian theory is embarrassed by the possibility of utility monsters.” A utility monster, in this case, would be an individual who would be able to gain an enormous amount of utility from the harms of others and be able to claim a greater sense of satisfaction than all of the harms that they have caused, combined. In the example that Nozick gives, an individual is able to kill many people and that individual’s happiness from killing outweighs all of the qsuffering of those he kills and makes him happier than the average. Because utility would be increased from this person’s choice, then a utilitarian would say that killing those people would be the right choice (Nozick 41). This is where the issue with utilitarianism lies. 
Consider the following argument. 1) If utilitarianism is true, then everyone is morally required to sacrifice their lives to be killed by this person in order to maximize utility. 2) It is not morally required for people to sacrifice their lives to this utility monster. 3) Therefore, utilitarianism is false (adapted from Lerner “9:28 PHI202” 16). 
Because most people would agree that it is not morally required for people to sacrifice their lives for one person's gain, it seems highly unlikely that utilitarianism is true. It allows for what most would agree on to be an unequal distribution of well-being as it allows extreme benefits for one individual to outweigh those of many others.
I believe that in reply to this objection, a utilitarian would be focused mainly on the benefit maximizing aspect of their own argument. In Shaw’s own arguments for the benefits of consequentialism, he writes that “critics...embrace certain deontological permissions to act without regard to the greater good” (34). In response to the above objection to utilitarianism, perhaps the utilitarian could argue similarly to Shaw who also said in a section about deontological permissions that it is highly unlikely that utilitarianism would require such an evil act. In addition to this, he states that the priority that consequentialists have to promoting motives and rules will typically produce the best outcomes when applied in real life (34).
While this argument may work in the sense that there are many cases in which utilitarianism can be used in order to get the right result, it does not mean that it is the right moral theory. In the search for a perfect moral theory that would allow one to have an answer to all kinds of different problems posed in the world, utilitarianism seems to fall short. As Williams said in his work, “A Critique of Utilitarianism,” the utilitarian can be right in certain situations, yet the right answer is not necessarily meant to be found by “asking the utilitarian’s questions” (Lerner “9_14 PHI202 Lecture” 15).
Unfortunately for standard consequentialism, the parts of its arguments that make up utilitarianism are what the utility monster objection is able to effectively argue against. The ability for individuals to use this theory to subscribe to the idea of moral aggregation in which one is able to treat individuals as “super-individuals” in which their overall well-being matters more because they experience more happiness than others experience suffering (Lerner “9:28 PHI202 Lecture” 23). In order for consequentialism to be viable under this a version of nonstandard consequentialism must be brought to the forefront. Specifically, the definition of impartial value must be tweaked in order to express the sentiment that a utility monster cannot exist. In this case, “impartial'' must mean that a singular person or even a small group of people's well-being cannot outweigh those of a larger group.
As the strongest objection to utilitarianism, the example of the utility monster is able to show that the possibility of only one individual’s well-being mattering can occur in a utilitarian world. With such possibilities, it is clear that both utilitarianism and standard consequentialism cannot be the correct moral theories to live in an objectively moral world as most would agree that this would create inequality.







Works Cited
Williams, Bernard. “A Critique of Utilitarianism.” Compiled by Sher, George. Ethics: Essential Readings in Moral Theory. Routledge Taylor &amp; Francis Group, 2012.
Shaw, William. “Consequentialism.” Ethics in Practice : An Anthology, edited by Hugh LaFollette, John Wiley & Sons, Incorporated, 2014. ProQuest Ebook Central,
         http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/princeton/detail.action?docID=1575631.
Lerner, Adam. “9:14 PHI202 Lecture” [Menti Presentation]. Canvas. https://princeton.instructure.com/courses/4690/files/875784?module_item_id=185889
Lerner, Adam.  “9:28 PHI202 Lecture” [Menti Presentation]. Canvas. https://princeton.instructure.com/courses/4690/files/928299?module_item_id=194329




